Statement of Purpose
Sajjad Uddin Mahmud
Curiosity and a penchant for problem-solving were two of my strongest qualities as a kid. This led me to pursue an engineering degree at Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology, the country's top engineering school. My interest in power systems arose due to my coursework and exposure to numerous difficulties in my country's infrastructure. I want to seek this interest even further while doing graduate study at the School of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science at Washington State University, Pullman. 
I have become increasingly interested in power and clean energy resources during my undergraduate. This resulted in ‘power’ being taken as a major and my undergraduate thesis was on the feasibility of nuclear plants in Bangladesh. After graduation, I worked in a variety of settings. While being a junior system engineer in a nationwide telecommunication service provider, I provided 24/7 supervision on the network management system by remotely configuring and troubleshooting numerous synchronous digital hierarchy multiplexers and switches. In addition, while working as a lecturer at a renowned private university in Bangladesh, I was involved in developing outcome-based curriculum. At my current workplace, a state-owned financial institution, I evaluated the technical design, modeling, and installation of over 40 large-scale industrial solar rooftop projects, of which 10 are operational, and the rest are in the process of being installed or approved. On a daily basis, I monitor these grid-tied solar rooftop systems using a real-time online monitoring system to measure PV generation and detect alarms/reasons in the event of a system abnormality. I have also assisted in developing technical standards, operating and maintenance guidelines for industrial rooftop solar systems in Bangladesh. I have also worked on a number of projects involving the development of new technologies for our country, such as floating solar and wind energy. Besides being excelled in PV system design and simulation, I have also gathered depth knowledge on policies and financial analysis of such kinds of projects. My strong analytical skills established during my undergraduate years have aided me in excelling in my workplace.
Aside from maintaining a successful full-time professional life, I earned an M.Sc. in Electrical and Electronic Engineering with a concentration in power systems, where I worked on boosting system strength cost-effectively under significant wind power penetration. Our findings suggest that by placing optimally sized synchronous condensers at the sites of common coupling in the wind energy-dominated power grids, efficient and large-scale wind power integration is possible while keeping costs in mind. I've also published two IEEE conference papers as the first author on this research. Recently, I have submitted a journal manuscript where a better choice between synchronous condenser and Static VAR Compensator is recommended to improve system strength under high wind penetration based on the technical and economic aspects. While working closing with the power development sector in my country, I have found that, the proliferation of distributed energy resources (DERs) can be alarming in the future if a resilient, intelligent, sustainable, and safe power grid cannot be ensured. Bangladesh will require technical assistance to help it navigate this paradigm change. Because I am passionate about this topic, I believe that academic training at a premium research institute is essential. 
While exploring some of the top-tier research done in line with my research interests, I have found Dr. Anamika Dubey, one of the esteemed professors in this field. Her work on proactive management of grid’s resources to improve power system resilience in the face of natural disasters have intrigued me. Therefore, I contacted her, and she advised me to apply to the WSU Pullman. Working under Dr. Dubey's supervision and in close contact or collaboration with the other WSU faculties would be a phenomenal experience. Furthermore, I gave lots of thoughts on the location of the university as I am going to spend a significant length of 4-5 years for Ph.D. which will shape my mind and future. I found Pullman, WA as the best place to spend my Ph.D. life. I understand that after completing my Ph.D. here, I will not only be an expert on a particular field but also have broad expertise to address a wide variety of future power system. I believe my strong foundations in renewable energy and power systems, as well as the experience of working in those fields, would help me fulfill my ambitions. 
Nothing would make me happier than to return to my homeland and give my knowledge and expertise to the growth of my country. And I am ready to commit myself to give the best of myself to begin this journey. While I recognize that getting a Ph.D. will not be simple, I am confident that my strong drive, skills, and previous experiences in academia and the workplace will help me measure up to graduate studies' rigors. And Washington State University, Pullman, with its diverse resources, provides the ideal environment for me to grow.
